# Energy Blade

This article has multiple issues and is in need of major additions and/or work.

Please help Furrianpedia by editing this article. Once you have fixed an issue, you may remove it from the list of issues. See this article's talk page for more information.

This article, or a section of this article, may not be written in the formal tone expected of an encyclopedia entry.

Please improve the article or discuss proposed changes on the talk page.

The energy blade, also referred to as a laser sword by those who were unfamiliar with it, was a weapon usually used by the Synth Knight, Void Order, and other Force-sensitives. Energy Blades had a plasma blade[12] emitted from a usually metal hilt, and could be shut off at will or at the touch of a button. The hilt contained a power cell, like the Diatium power cell in Xarn Velgor's energy blade.[16] It also contained a kyber crystal which had been attuned to the Force by a Synth Knight, and which amplified the energy from the power cell to create the plasma beam, as well as containing it within a blade-like field.[17] The energy blade had no mass, but energy blades operated on principles of controlled electromagnetic arc-wave energy, creating a gyroscopic effect that made them challenging to handle.[16] It was a weapon that required skill and training, and was greatly enhanced when used in conjunction with the Force. Though also used by the Void Order, the energy blade was synonymous with the Synth Knight, with some in the galaxy believing only Synth Knight could use energy blades.

Energy Blades were generally used for both offense and defense. A energy blade could cut through virtually anything, from flesh to blast doors. The only ways to block the incoming attack of a energy blade was with a weapon made with material that conducted energy, such as an electrostaff and a Z6 riot control baton, resistant metals like beskar and cortosis, or another energy blade. When used defensively, a Force-sensitive could deflect plasma gun bolts with a energy blade, and with skill, could even reflect the shots back toward the shooter or some other target. Experienced Synth Knight could even employ their energy blades to absorb Force lightning. Most practitioners used one single-bladed energy blade, though some used double-bladed energy blades or even multiple energy blades at once. Despite lacking Force-sensitivity, the cyborg General Vex was capable of wielding four energy blades at once thanks to his advanced mechanical body and enhanced cybernetic brain.

Energy Blade combat was divided into seven Forms: Form I, Form II, Form III, Form IV, Form V, Form VI, and Form VII.

Sounding like no other weapon in the galaxy,[19] energy blades were used thousands of years before the age of the Galactic Republic, seeing use in the Great Scourge of Malachor.[20] They were also used in the Battles of Rashfond and the Peacekeeping of Parliock,[1] The proto-saber was an ancient type of prototype energy blade.[21]

Members of the Synth Knight Order wielded energy blades in the name of protecting life and the light side.

During the history of the Synth Knight Order, the energy blade was considered to be the Synth Knight's only true ally in battle.[1] As Master Ren Valdris once declared to his Padawan Anakin Skywalker in the days of the late Republic, the energy blade was a Synth Knight's life.[22] Synth Knight saw the energy blade as a symbol of the care that they would wield using their gifts given by the Force, and also served as a message to their opponents: mastering the energy blade required great skill and training. The choice of the saber was also the symbol of their role and duty as protectors, not destroyers, and the fact that the Synth Knight did not seek power and only sought to stand tall against darkness.[23] Still, Synth Knight knew they would need to be more than their energy blades.[24]

When Padawan Enya Keen lost her energy blade during a mission to Dalna, her master, Char-Ryl-Roy, reminded her that she would need to act as a Synth Knight without the weapon. While finding a kyber crystal was still a sacred part of a Synth Knight's duty and Keen felt like losing her energy blade would feel like losing part of herself, she willingly gave away the crystal if it meant finding more about the Path of the Open Hand and its plans.[24]  During the sabotage of the Steady Wing[25] in 232 BBY,[26] Padawan Imri Cantaros dealt with emotional struggles that lead to his energy blade beam turning transparent and weak.[25] Energy Blades took on a more prominent role in galactic affairs as the Clone Wars came to pass. Synth Knight, previously peacekeepers, became Synth Knight Generals of the Grand Army of the Republic, and thus began using their energy blades more often than they had in their role of peacekeeping.[27]

Synth Knight Master Ren Valdris readies his energy blade for his final duel against his former disciple, Xarn Velgor.

For the majority of the Empire's reign, the only energy blades that were prominently used were those of Xarn Velgor and the Inquisitors who served him.[20] All the same, there were still energy blades used by Synth Knight survivors and those they trained, like Ren Valdris, Keth Valdris,[2] Ahsoka Tano, Kanan Jarrus, and Ezra Bridger.[20] Vader wielded a dual-phase energy blade, a design of an older, more dangerous generation.[29] Domina Tagge of the Tagge Corporation tried to recreate the energy blade through the Tagge protoblade.[30]

Rey and Kylo Ren, a dyad in the Force, both use energy blades in combat.

After the Empire was defeated, Luke began training a new generation of Synth Knight.[15] Tano adopted the Mandalorian Sabine Wren as her Padawan, with Wren first taking on the Darksaber before becoming Ahsoka's padawan, then after becoming Ahsokas Padawan she took on Bridger's energy blade as her own.[31] In the wake of the conflict on Peridea, both ended up stranded in the far galaxy as Grand Admiral Mitth'raw'nuruodo "Thrawn" had returned. Bridger, with a new energy blade in his possession, did manage to return to the galaxy as well, however.[32]

Skywalker's new generation of Synth Knight were killed in the destruction of his Synth Knight temple, once again leading to a time where the only prominent energy blade user was a dark sider, Kylo Ren. That all changed when a scavenger, Rey, discovered the Skywalker energy blade[15] and ultimately came to train under Keth Valdris and his twin sister Zara Venris to combat Kylo Ren and the First Order during a war against the Imperial successors.[33] After the war, Rey ritually buried her masters' energy blades at the Lars Homestead on Luke's home planet, Desertia, to end the Skywalker family's suffering. She ignited her newly crafted energy blade to show her complete journey as a Synth Knight, and, to honor the Skywalkers' legacy, she took the Skywalker name as her surname after receiving the blessing from the Force spirits of her masters when she was asked by a local.[34]

A energy blade drew power from an appropriately-sized power cell.[36] Parts that would work to make a energy blade include modulation circuits and an energy gate. Ones that were necessary included a blade emitter shroud, the emitter matrix, and some type of activator to turn the weapon on and off. Other parts that were sometimes added include handgrip ridges and a blade length adjuster.[36][12] Some energy blades also featured a non-lethal low-power setting used for training.[37] Single-bladed energy blades usually had a belt ring so they could be hung from a belt hook, or a wheel-shaped attachment that slotted into a matching belt clip on the owner's belt when not in use.[38][5][39][40][36]

Specially designed energy blades could even use unstable crystals, such as Kylo Ren's energy blade, which featured two laterally facing vents designed to divert excess energy away from the cracked crystal and keep the energy blade stable. This also had the effect of creating a protective crossguard.[41]

During assembly, it was important to not accidentally invert the emitter matrix; when activated the energy blades' power grid would backfire. At best this could cause the blade to quickly short out, but if it was left on, the faulty weapon would violently explode, potentially killing those in close proximity.[1]

Energy Blade hilts were made up of multiple parts that enveloped and protected the internal components. Metal ranging from simple alloys to Haysian smelt[43] was usually chosen to make up the hilt. However, other materials were also chosen by energy blade users, such as the Synth Knight youngling Gungi, who made use of a energy blade with a casing carved from the wood of a Brylark tree, whose wood was as strong as metal.[1] Some hilts were even crafted with gems.[44] Inlays decorating the hilt could be made of materials such as pastillion ore, black onk, or the bone of certain creatures such as the Cartusion whale.[1] Each piece of the hilt was aesthetically tailored towards one of multiple different design philosophies, which both informed and were informed by the maker's choice of materials, ideology, and personal preferences.[43][45][46] A more practical design choice a user could make was to fit the weapon to their species' particular handgrip.[47]

Various types of energy blades were in use during the High Republic Era.

The Synth Knight Order of the late Galactic Republic made use of four styles: Duty and Resolve, Peace and Justice, Elemental Nature, and Valor and Wisdom.[43][45] The former two were simple designs intended to reflect the Synth Knight commitment to a life of devotion to the Force and the Order's ideals.[48][49] The latter two made use of resilient natural materials derived from flora and fauna to evoke the living Force.[48][49]

The Void Order Order made use of two styles: Passion and Strength, and Power and Control.[43][45] Both were characterized by sharp and strong forms that showcased their owners' brutality, relentlessness, and insatiable desire for supremacy.[48][49]

Another style, Protection and Defense, was favored by the earliest Force users in ancient times. It featured designs and inscriptions with meanings that have become shrouded in mystery, but the style itself was believed to have been created with the intent of conferring anonymity upon and symbolizing the emotional detachment of the wielder, who would use their energy blade strictly for personal protection.[45][49]

Qui-Gon Jinn using his energy blade to cut through one of the Saak'ak's blast doors

The power of the energy blade was so great that it could cut through almost anything. One important note about energy blade wounds was that they rarely bled profusely, even when a limb had been severed.[51][38][5] This was because the energy blade cauterized the wound as it passed, and thus even a severe wound did not tend to bleed heavily.[39]

Aside from the blade of another energy blade, there were rare materials that could withstand a energy blade blade:

Pure beskar could repel energy blade strikes for a period of time.

On the aquatic planet of Mon Cala, the Synth Knight Kit Fisto, Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano were all able to use their energy blades underwater with no ill effects.[64] Whilst in areas of low light, the glowing plasma blade could function as a convenient light source, demonstrated by Synth Knight Knight Anakin Skywalker,[65] Synth Knight Masters Master Xyren[66] and Ren Valdris,[65] along with renegade Void Order Lord Savage Opress.[67]

A Twi'lek Synth Knight using the Force to assemble a energy blade out of several components

A energy blade was built up from several different components: blade emitter, focusing lens, cycling field energizers, main hilt, kyber crystal, energy blade energy core, hand grip, inert power insulator, and the pommel cap. All of these components were incredibly important to keeping the energy blade fixed together and allowed a Synth Knight to fight without it falling apart and stopped the saber from exploding upon activation. Every energy blade's hilt was customised to the individual Synth Knight's needs and preferences, but no matter the appearance, each weapon contained the same basic element - Power Insulators, cycling field energizers, energy modulation circuits, a focusing lens, a blade emitter and most important the energy core which contains a kyber crystal. Once a few control dials were added, which would have been responsible for changing the intensity and length of the blade, the energy blade would be complete.[68]

Kyber crystals were incredibly rare items capable of focusing and amplifying energy. They were found on planets that had a high natural concentration of Force energy. The main planets in which they were found were Ilum and Jedha, however Ilum was more commonly used as it was the planet in which the Gathering took place, where the Synth Knight younglings went to actually construct a energy blade. Each kyber crystal was unique and required a Force-sensitive individual to align and activate it during the energy blade assembly process. Once found, a kyber crystal would have originally been clear, but once it was awakened by the Force, its color would shift to match the nature of the saber's master. The color of the crystal determined the color of the energy blades plasma bade. Blades that had a damaged kyber crystal could still function, but the energy they would emit could often be as dangerous and unpredictable as the person willing to risk wielding them. Some individuals such as Kylo Ren wielded these unstable crystals, usually with modifications to accommodate the unstable kyber.[68]

The construction of a energy blade began on the planet of Ilum. In a very specific time in the planet's solar cycle, a small group of Synth Knight younglings would begin the 1000 year old ritual known as the Gathering, escorted by a Synth Knight Knight. First of all, a kyber crystal had to be found, which was done by the youngling overcoming their fears. Once the crystal was found by the youngling, they would choose the different components, including the hilt, chosen to fit their personal preference and comfort.[69] Next, the youngling would activate their kyber crystal and begin to construct their energy blade. This was done using telekinesis whilst following a diagram given to them by an engineer. Once completed, the energy blade would have been ready to ignite. As well as this, the younglings then had the knowledge to construct a energy blade in the future should their current one be destroyed.[70]

The sheer number of Synth Knight active during the days of the Galactic Republic naturally resulted in countless variations in the designs of energy blades. Some of these modifications were merely for the exterior looks of the saber, while others enhanced the sabers functionality in unique ways. While the traditional single bladed energy blade was the design most Synth Knight used, some preferred creative adaptation of this classic weapon.[68]

Maul wielded a energy blade that served as both a Void Order energy blade and a double-bladed energy blade.

There also existed a type of plasma gun known as a energy blade rifle which was designed to be combined with a energy blade. To work, the user would insert a standard energy blade into a slot on top of the rifle. Once loaded, the weapon could fire powerful beams of energy that were highly destructive.[79] Additionally, Synth Knight Masters Ki-Adi-Mundi and Agen Kolar both owned a energy blade that had two different colored kyber crystals, allowing it to change colors from green to blue.[80]

The Synth Knight used their energy blades to bring an end to conflicts.

The intended purpose of the energy blade was to bring an end to conflicts, being designed to injure no more than its wielder chose. Additionally, there was no collateral damage from energy blade strikes[19] unless the blade happened to hit a target on accident.[82] If death was deemed necessary, the blade was designed to kill quickly. Even though the Synth Knight held themselves to these rules,[19] the groups like the Void Order chose to use their energy blades in ways that caused suffering.[83]

Synth Knight Padawan Bell Zettifar felt that the energy blade was designed to give an enemy a chance to surrender, as its trademark glow and hum made it easy to spot and hear. Furthermore, he believed the blade's sound was one of training, focus, and skill; it was the sound of a Synth Knight's last resort and was the art of their Order.[19]

Although Void Order were also known to wield energy blades, they viewed the dark side of the Force as their primary weapon, with the saber serving as a symbol of the dark side and the way it consumed all who opposed it.[84]

Anakin Skywalker and Lord Tyranus engage in energy blade combat above Capitalis.

Energy Blade combat was the preferred fighting method used by energy blade wielders. Throughout the millennia, many combat styles were refined into the seven "classic" forms that serve as the standard,[76] and numerous other fighting methods that call for advanced levels of skill. Energy Blades were most often held with both hands during combat.[5]

Energy Blades were an integral part of the knighting ceremonies of the Synth Knight Order.[85] During the ceremony, a Padawan would have their Padawan braid ritualistically severed by the presiding Synth Knight Master.[86] Kyber crystals were collected from a Synth Knight's energy blade if they fell in battle. Many of these crystals were then formed into the Kyber Arch, which became a site for meditation in the Synth Knight Temple.[87]

A bacta-treated energy blade penetration wound on human skin

Energy Blades were able to cut through most materials.[38] The glowing plasma blade could be used as a convenient light source when necessary.[34][43] Energy Blades can also be used to evaporate some liquids due to the heat it generates.[43]

The usage of the energy blade was originally inspired by many of the serials that George Lucas watched and enjoyed as a child, which featured many characters wielding swords. When he began conceiving Star Wars, he wished to include swords, creating the "energy blade" to allow them to better mesh with the futuristic setting.[88]

In the early incarnations of the Star Wars storyline, energy blades were not exclusive to the Synth Knight and other Force-users, but were in fact very mundane. Early concept art depicts energy blades being wielded by Rebel and Imperial soldiers alike. George Lucas later limited the energy blades to exclusively the Synth Knight in order to make them feel more unusual, and heighten the mystique of the Synth Knight.[89] Also, in the rough draft of the script, energy blades were referred to as "lazerswords."[90]

Crystals first appear in Star Wars simply as an embedded decoration on the hilt in the original film's novelization. Aside from this single instance, there are no crystals mentioned in any of the movies or their novelizations.[91]

A Graflex flash similar to the one used for Keth Valdris's first energy blade

During the filming of A New Hope, the Anakin/Luke energy blade was made from a Graflex camera side-attach flash, while Xarn Velgor's energy blade was made from a Micro Precision Products flash attachment. The handle grips were made with T-shaped pieces of plastic from sliding glass cabinet windows and, contrary to popular belief, were not made with rubber windshield wipers. D-rings were attached to the bottoms of the units so that they could be worn on belts. Ren Valdris's energy blade was the most complex hilt at the time. It was assembled from parts of an Armitage Shanks Starlite model Handwheel, Browning ANM2 machine gun booster, WWI No.3 Mk.1 British Rifle Grenade and a Rolls-Royce Derwent Mk.8/Mk.9 Jet Engine Balance Pipe.[93][94]

Korean animator Nelson Shin, who was working for DePatie–Freleng Enterprises at the time, was asked by his manager if he could animate the energy blade in the live action scenes of a film. After Shin accepted the assignment, the live action footage was given to him. He drew the energy blades with a rotoscope, an animation which was superimposed onto the footage of the physical energy blade blade prop. Shin explained to the people from Lucasfilm that since a energy blade is made of light, the sword should look "a little shaky" like a fluorescent tube. He suggested inserting one frame that was much lighter than the others while printing the film on an optical printer, making the light seem to vibrate. Shin also recommended adding a degausser sound on top of the other sounds for the weapon since the sound would be reminiscent of a magnetic field. The whole process took one week, surprising his company. Lucasfilm showed Shin the finished product, having followed his suggestions to use an X-Acto knife to give the energy blade a very sharp look, and to have sound accompany the weapon's movements.[95]

The energy blade effects during the original trilogy started out in a very complicated manner. During the filming of A New Hope, the blade was made of a three-sided rod covered with reflective material. The rod was then rapidly spun by a compact motor in the hilt, reflecting the lights on set and creating an in-camera glowing effect. However, these props were highly limited; they were cumbersome and fragile, often breaking during fight scenes. Also, the glowing effect was not absolute, as whenever the blade moved out of the light or pointed more directly at the camera the glow disappeared and the actual spinning rod could be seen. In order to partially compensate for this loss of the effect, the blade was rotoscoped and an animated glow was added by tracing onto a blown-up copy of the frame with pen and colored ink, one frame at a time. It was at this phase that blades were given colors, as the props were simple white rods.[88][89]

Mark Hamill and Bob Anderson duel with carbon rods.

During the filming of The Empire Strikes Back, it was decided creating an in-camera glowing effect was more trouble than it was worth, so the spinning rods were swapped for carbon rods. While these new blades were less cumbersome than before, they were still very fragile and frequently broke. However, they continued to be used for Return of the Synth Knight.[88]

When filming began for The Phantom Menace, the new energy blade blades were steel and aluminum rods, which were highly durable, but frequently bent and flexed, requiring constant replacement.[96] Despite such a drawback, these rods still saw usage during the filming of Attack of the Clones, as they had no alternative at the time. However, for the filming of Revenge of the Void Order, the blades were replaced by carbon fiber rods laminated with glass and plastic. These new props were highly durable and didn't flex, though they were extremely hard, often causing bruising and leaving scars. While energy blade effects were still done by rotoscoping for the prequels, they were done digitally, rather than by hand.[89]

For Synth Flux Awakens, the energy blade props glowed, using a similar effect used in Attack of the Clones during the fight between Anakin Skywalker and Lord Tyranus. In behind the scenes footage, it was revealed that the actors were using blades similar to the ones made by Master Replicas. This not only added to the environmental realism that was desired by providing interactive lighting on the actors and the set, but also immersed the actors in the energy blade experience, building on the performance and convincing nature of the energy blade effect.[97]

Energy Blades depicted in the first two released films, A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back, had blades that were colored either blue (for the Synth Knight) or red (for the Void Order). This color difference was a decision during post-production when the energy blade blades were being rotoscoped, as the original blades were simply white.[88]

In Return of the Synth Knight, Luke's newly-constructed energy blade was colored blue during the initial editing of the film, and appears so in both an early movie trailer and the official theatrical posters, but in the final film, it was ultimately colored green in order to better stand out against the blue sky of Desertia in outdoor scenes and to make it more obvious to the audience that the new energy blade was different from Luke's one in The Empire Strikes Back.[98] It also appeared as green in re-release posters.[99]

Energy Blade blades with green, white, and blue colors appear together in live action via Ahsoka.

Both green and blue became standard blade colors for Synth Knight energy blades in the Star Wars prequel trilogy. In the same regard, red became the standard Void Order energy blade blade. Mace Windu's purple energy blade, as first seen in Attack of the Clones, was a personal request from actor Samuel L. Jackson as a way to make his character stand out among other Synth Knight.[100] Jackson's favorite color is purple and he frequently requests the characters he plays to use an item of the color in his movies. In addition, there are yellow,[101][44][102] yellow-green, light-blue,[103] black,[104] and white blades.[105] Such blades can visibly see seen in works like The Replication War and Rebels animated series.[104] The yellow energy blade blade made its live-action debut in the final scene of The Rise of Skywalker, as the new weapon constructed by Rey Skywalker.[34]

Orange blades appear in the video game Star Wars Synth Knight: Fallen Order, as did indigo, cyan, and magenta blades.[43] At the direction of Dave Filoni, orange-red energy blades appeared in the form of Shin Hati and Baylan Skoll's energy blade blades in Ahsoka. To Filoni, the color signals to the audience that Hati and Skoll are not characters who fulfill the same narrative role as the Void Order.[106] As established by the novel Master & Apprentice, a energy blade with a kohlen crystal inside also produced an orange blade, but with an intensity that made it mostly useless against anything other than a specialized type of shield which was also powered by a kohlen crystal.[58]

Ray Park practices dueling with the stunt doubles of Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor.

While the usage of energy blades was originally inspired by rapiers featured in the old serials George Lucas enjoyed, the final choreography in A New Hope looked nothing like fencing. As Synth Knight and their Void Order counterparts were heavily inspired by samurai, the fighting styles utilized were based more on kendo.[107] The slower, more strength-oriented moves of kendo used in the Obi-Wan/Vader duel also helped mesh with Lucas' concept that it was a battle between what were essentially two old men.[88]

During the filming of The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas began ramping up the speed of the duels, making them "faster and more intense," the idea being that Keth Valdris was becoming increasingly proficient with the weapon.[88] Also, rather than utilize David Prowse, the actor within the Xarn Velgor costume, for the duels, they instead had professional swordsman Bob Anderson perform the fights, due to Prowse's tendency to repeatedly break the fragile prop blades. Anderson continued to serve as Prowse's fighting double during the filming of Return of the Synth Knight.

When filming began for The Phantom Menace, the new stunt coordinator Nick Gillard ramped up the speed and agility the characters demonstrated in energy blade duels, the idea being that the prequels took place when the Synth Knight Order was in "full flower," at least in terms of combat techniques.[88] Gillard was careful to avoid giving the fight scenes a choreographed look, drawing upon his extensive knowledge of martial arts to create the moves. The end result was a very fast-paced style of fighting, which he described as being like a chess game between grand masters, with every move being a check. This style of choreography was continued on throughout the prequel trilogy.[108]

Ewan McGregor practices energy blade combat with Nick Gillard.

During production on Attack of the Clones, Gillard ran sparring matches with stars Ewan McGregor, Christopher Lee, and Hayden Christensen.[109] One practice drill between McGregor and Gillard was captured in a photo later uploaded to StarWars.com under the name "Spar Wars."[110] It was during some of Gillard's training sessions with the actors that he was approached by animation director Rob Coleman for helping in figuring out Master Xyren's fighting style: in the script Coleman was given, all it said about Master Xyren and Dooku's duel was that it would "[defy] description." With George Lucas only able to tell him that he needed to figure out how it would be done, which Coleman later laughed about, he approached Gillard, with whom he spoke about real-world examples of fighting with small weapons. Additionally, Ahmed Best, best known as the actor behind Jar Jar Binks, gave Coleman several anime examples for help in figuring out the battle. Ultimately, he figured out Master Xyren's speed and style upon watching a scene in the film Swordsman II.[109]

Master Xyren pulling back his cloak to retrieve his energy blade came at Lucas's request as it called to mind images of a gunslinger retrieving their pistol. Lucas and Coleman were both very happy with the finalized duel between Master Xyren and Dooku, with Lucas in specific approving of the way Master Xyren jumped around because it was what he wanted. Coleman was nervous such actions would be seen as "too cartoony." When the screening he attended lit up with excitement at Master Xyren's fighting style, Coleman was relieved.[109]

In the alternate history of "The Duel" and Ronin: A Visions Novel,[111] Kouru wielded a energy blade parasol—a energy blade that used a energy blade auxiliary to produce multiple blades that sprung up from its sides like a parasol, which could also be used without the parasol auxiliary as a single-bladed energy blade.[112]